# Chapter 4 -- Bootstrapping -- M9301-YA, -YB, -YE, -YF, -YJ

The routines to bootstrap a device typically read in the first sector, block, or 512 words from the device into location 0 through 512 of memory. The exception to this rule is the paper tape boot. The paper tape boot is unique in that it can do no error checking and the secondary bootstrap (the absolute loader, for example) is read into the upper part of memory. The actual locations loaded by the paper tape boot are partially determined by the secondary bootstrap itself and by the size routine which determines the highest available memory address within the first 28K. The flexible disk (or floppy) reads sector 1 on track 1 into consecutive locations starting at 0. The magnetic tape boots read the second block into consecutive locations starting at 0. If no errors are detected in the device, the bootstraps normally transfer control to location 0 in order to execute the secondary bootstrap just loaded. The only exception to this starting address concerns the paper tape boots. They transfer control to location XXX374, where XXX is determined initially by the size routine to be at the top of memory. This is where the absolute loader has just been loaded.

If a device error is detected, a reset will be executed and the bootstrap will try again. The bootstrap will be retried indefinitely until it succeeds without error unless the user (operator) intervenes. The advantage of retrying the boot is that if a particular device being booted is not on-line or not loaded, perhaps because of a power failure, the boot will give the device a chance to power up (for disks this is essential).

A magnetic tape transport, however, will not automatically reload itself after a power failure and restart. This situation requires user intervention. The user must reload the magtape and bring it back on-line, at which time the magtape bootstrap, which will have been continually attempting to boot the tape, will succeed.

Note that the only way to bootstrap a device drive (unit or transport) other than drive 0 is by entering the console emulator to specify the drive number desired. Otherwise the bootstraps will default to drive 0. This means that only drive 0 of a device can be bootstrapped without operator intervention.
